Last week, Beyoncé released “Homecoming,” a documentary and live special that was ostensibly designed to pull back the curtain on her 2018 Coachella set, which was one of the grandest, most innovative performances of the festival era. As in her self-directed 2013 film, “Life Is But a Dream,” the documentary component was maddeningly thin. It left viewers with highly stylized platitudes that summarized what was already evident in the festival footage: Beyoncé’s work ethic is unparalleled, and the art that she generates is a product of emotional integrity, stylistic ingenuity, and deep reverence for tradition. “Every tiny detail had an intention,” she says in a voice-over, discussing the costumes designed by Olivier Rousteing, the creative director of the French fashion house Balmain. If you paid attention to the performance, that statement is altogether redundant.

To learn about Beyoncé, you must turn to her work. This week, as an addendum to “Homecoming,” she made her tour-de-force album “Lemonade” available on all streaming platforms, after a three-year period during which it was siloed on Tidal, the streaming service that she and Jay-Z partly own. As a bonus, she included the original demo version of the song “Sorry,” a searing kiss-off and the album’s attitudinal centerpiece. Whereas the final version of “Sorry” was a female-empowerment anthem with a T-shirt-slogan hook (“I ain’t sorry / Boy, bye”), the original demo is a subtler, more sedate track with a gauzy sound and a diaristic delivery. For a demo, it’s still quite polished, but it contains what seem like unrehearsed moments of confession. “Sorry” is a song about fleeing a corrupted marriage with children in tow—and about the greener pastures that await. On the demo, that narrative is made more potent and explicit. (“Me and my daughter gon’ be alright,” she sings; the final version substituted “baby” for “daughter.”) The demo’s hook is also more reflective, less sass than fantasy: “We really could be young, wild, and free,” Beyoncé sings breathily, as if in a daydream. These are minor tweaks, perhaps barely perceptible—but they come from an artist who, we know, imbues every detail with intention. If one pays attention, they make for bracing revelations.